docs/guides/modules/ROOT/pages/modular-monoliths/1-creating-a-module.adoc, before:


== Creating our application
Let's start by creating our Spring Boot application.

Go to http://start-across.foreach.be and ensure that the option `Blank Across application without any modules` is selected.
Click on `Generate project`, download, unzip to a folder and import the project via the `pom.xml` in your favorite IDE.

When unzipped, you should see the following folder structure:

.Project structure
[source]
----
src/
  main/
    java/
      com/example/demo/
        application/
        DemoApplication.java
    resources/
      application.yml
      application-dev.yml
      application-prod.yml
      build.properties
  test/
    java/
      com/example/demo/application/
      it/
        ITDemoApplication.java
.gitignore
README.md
lombok.config
pom.xml
----

There's only 2 java classes added:

* `DemoApplication` which represents the Spring Boot application
* `ITDemoApplication` which is an integration test for bootstrapping the application

Let's a have quick look at the source code of `DemoApplication`:

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/DemoApplication.java
[source,java]
----
@AcrossApplication(
		modules = {

		}
)
public class DemoApplication
{
	public static void main( String[] args ) {
		SpringApplication springApplication = new SpringApplication( DemoApplication.class );
		springApplication.setDefaultProperties( Collections.singletonMap( "spring.config.location", "${user.home}/dev-configs/demo-application.yml" ) );
		springApplication.run( args );
	}
}
----

This is run as a `SpringApplication` but instead of `@SpringBootApplication` the class is annotated with `@AcrossApplication` signaling we want to bootstrap as a modular application based on Across.

In an Across application we also call this file the *application descriptor*.

Currently our application descriptor is empty, there are no modules added to it.
Let's boot up our newly created application.

=== Run the application

You can simply execute the `DemoApplication` `main` method to run the application.
From a terminal you can also use the following command:

 $ mvn spring-boot:run

When starting up the application, you should find the following in the console output:

[source]
----
: ---
: AcrossContext: DemoApplication (AcrossContext-1)
: Bootstrapping 2 modules in the following order:
: 1 - DemoApplicationModule [resources: demo]: class com.foreach.across.core.DynamicAcrossModule$DynamicApplicationModule
: 2 - AcrossContextPostProcessorModule [resources: AcrossContextPostProcessorModule]: class com.foreach.across.core.AcrossContextConfigurationModule
: ---
----

This is a very important piece of information for our application: it tells us which modules are being started and in which order.
We will come back to this later on, but you should make sure you can always easily retrieve this from the logs.

Even though we don't specify any modules ourselves, we can see that the application bootstraps 2 modules that are added by default.
You can ignore these for now, we'll explain them towards the end of this post.

=== Testing the application

Apart from running the main class, you should also be able to run the integration test: `ITDemoApplication`.

If you want to run all integration tests from the terminal, you can do:

 $ mvn integration-test

But usually I just execute the test class or test method directly from the IDE.

The integration tests bootstraps the entire `DemoApplication` as well, and is pre-configured for a Spring MVC testing scenario (using `MockMvc`).
We won't be using that in the rest of this tutorial however.

== Adding a component

Now that we can boot up our application, let's add some code to it.
Let's start by adding a component in the same package as the `DemoApplication` class.

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/ComponentOne.java
[source,java]
----
package com.example.demo;

@Component
@Slf4j
public class ComponentOne
{
	public ComponentOne() {
		LOG.info( "Component created: {}", getClass() );
	}
}
----

This class declares a simple bean component that should get instantiated when Spring scans the package for all classes annotated with `@Component`.
However, when you re-run the application integration test, you *should not find* the test _Component created_ anywhere, meaning our component actually did not get created.

WARNING: If you do find the output, you probably added the component to the `application` child package.
Move it next to the `DemoApplication` instead, we will explain the purpose of the `application` package at the end of this post.

In a regular `@SpringBootApplication` we would expect Spring Boot to scan the root package and all child packages below for components.
An `@AcrossApplication` however encourages you to bundle your components in separate modules, and to only treat the application class as a descriptor for which modules should be added.

In fact, if you were to manually add a `@ComponentScan` directly on the `DemoApplication` class, starting the application would fail altogether (with a specific error message).

In order to continue, we must put our component in an Across module.

== Creating an Across module

Every module is identified by a unique name and a _module descriptor_, a class extending `AcrossModule`.
As a convention and to help you separate your code, each module usually resides in its own base package.

Let's create a package `com.example.demo.modules.one` and add a module descriptor to it:

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/modules/one/ModuleOne.java
[source,java]
----
package com.example.demo.modules.one;

public class ModuleOne extends AcrossModule
{
	public static final String NAME = "ModuleOne";

	@Override
	public String getName() {
		return NAME;
	}

	@Override
	protected void registerDefaultApplicationContextConfigurers( Set<ApplicationContextConfigurer> contextConfigurers ) {
		contextConfigurers.add( ComponentScanConfigurer.forAcrossModule( ModuleOne.class ) );
	}
}
----

This class is a module descriptor that defines a module named `ModuleOne`, and configures it so it scans its package for components when starting up.

Let's move the previously created `ComponentOne` to the same package and rename it to `InternalComponentOne`.

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/modules/one/InternalComponentOne.java
[source,java]
----
package com.example.demo.modules.one;

@Component
@Slf4j
public class InternalComponentOne
{
	public InternalComponentOne() {
		LOG.info( "Component created: {}", getClass() );
	}
}
----

You should end up with the following project structure:

[source]
----
com.example.demo/
  modules/
    one/
      ModuleOne
      InternalComponentOne
  DemoApplication
----

We have defined a new module (`ModuleOne`) which will contain a single component (`InternalComponentOne`) when it is started.
All that's left to do is to add our newly defined module to our application.
We can do that by adding the module descriptor as a bean in the `DemoApplication`:

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/DemoApplication.java
[source,java]
----

@AcrossApplication(
public class DemoApplication {
    @Bean
    public ModuleOne moduleOne() {
        return new ModuleOne();
    }

    ...
}
----

If you now run the integration test or re-start the application, you should see that `ModuleOne` was added and that `InternalComponentOne` got created.

.Console output excerpt
[source]
----
: ---:
: AcrossContext: DemoApplication (AcrossContext-1)
: Bootstrapping 3 modules in the following order:
: 1 - ModuleOne [resources: ModuleOne]: class com.example.demo.modules.one.ModuleOne
: 2 - DemoApplicationModule [resources: demo]: class com.foreach.across.core.DynamicAcrossModule$DynamicApplicationModule
: 3 - AcrossContextPostProcessorModule [resources: AcrossContextPostProcessorModule]: class com.foreach.across.core.AcrossContextConfigurationModule
: ---
: ...
: --- Starting module bootstrap
:
: 1 - ModuleOne [resources: ModuleOne]: class com.example.demo.modules.one.ModuleOne
: Refreshing ModuleOne: startup date [Wed Sep 26 08:57:46 CEST 2018]; parent: AcrossContext-1
: ...
: Component created: class com.example.demo.modules.one.InternalComponentOne
:
: 2 - DemoApplicationModule [resources: demo]: class com.foreach.across.core.DynamicAcrossModule$DynamicApplicationModule
----

== Testing an Across module in isolation

Part of the modularization aspect is that it should help you define and manage your dependencies.
As such it is also important that you can test your modules in isolation: with the minimum set of required dependencies.

Our newly created `ModuleOne` does not declare any explicit dependencies on other modules.
So let's create a separate integration test that bootstraps our module all by itself.

We can do so by using the `across-test` features that have automatically been added to the project.

Create a new test class which we will use for separate module integration testing:

.src/test/java/test/TestModuleBootstrapScenarios.java
[source,java]
----
@Slf4j
public class TestModuleBootstrapScenarios
{
	@Test
	public void moduleOneShouldBootstrapInIsolation() {
		try (AcrossTestContext ignore = AcrossTestBuilders.standard( false )
		                                                  .modules( new ModuleOne() )
		                                                  .build()) {
			LOG.trace( "Bootstrap successful." );
		}
	}
}
----

This test creates an Across context configuration that only starts `ModuleOne`.
Since we do not need any web features, we create a `standard` configuration.
And since we do not require a database, we disable the default test datasource (the `false` argument).
The latter simply ensures that our test executes a bit faster.

We're using a try-with-resources approach to ensure that everything gets cleaned up nicely afterwards.
Our test simply checks that starting up works and writes a log message, we don't validate anything else.

You should now have the following structure for your test code:

[source]
----
src/
  test/
    java
      com.example.demo/
      it/
        ITDemoApplication.java
      test/
        TestModuleBootstrapScenarios.java
----


.A note about the tests package structure
****
We have created no less than 3 package structures for our tests.
This is not any form of requirement but simply a conventional approach we prefer:

* `com.example.demo` contains the actual unit tests, often tests that reside in the same package as the units of code they are testing
* `test` contains partial integration tests, integration tests for "parts of the application"
* `it` contains the full-stack integration tests, in this case tests that bootstrap the entire application

In the Maven configuration provided by the initializr, the `it` integration tests are only run with the `integration-test` goal, whereas all others are executed when using `mvn test`.

****

You should be able to execute test `moduleOneShouldBootstrapInIsolation()` successfully and find the following in the console output:

.Test console output excerpt
[source]
----
---
AcrossContext: AcrossContext-1 (AcrossContext-1)
Bootstrapping 2 modules in the following order:
1 - ModuleOne [resources: ModuleOne]: class com.example.demo.modules.one.ModuleOne
2 - AcrossContextPostProcessorModule [resources: AcrossContextPostProcessorModule]: class com.foreach.across.core.AcrossContextConfigurationModule
---
----

The `DemoApplicationModule` - a feature of using the `@AcrossApplication` annotation - is now no longer available.
The `AcrossContextPostProcessorModule` is automatically added by the Across framework and cannot be removed, it always exists.

=== Cleaning up the test logging output

You might notice that you get a lot more logging output when running this unit test.
This is because when using `@AcrossApplication` a default logging configuration gets initialized, but that is not the case when using the `AcrossTestBuilders`.

The easiest way to fix this is to provide a `logback-test.xml` in your test resources, and to import a pre-configured sample configuration which comes with the `across-test` dependency.

.src/test/resources/logback-test.xml
[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<configuration>
	<include resource="logback-across-test.xml"/>
</configuration>
----

When added correctly, this should be the full console output of running `moduleOneShouldBootstrapInIsolation()`:

.Console output with logback-test.xml in place
[source,xml]
----
AcrossBootstrapper: ---
AcrossBootstrapper: AcrossContext: AcrossContext-1 (AcrossContext-1)
AcrossBootstrapper: Bootstrapping 2 modules in the following order:
AcrossBootstrapper: 1 - ModuleOne [resources: ModuleOne]: class com.example.demo.modules.one.ModuleOne
AcrossBootstrapper: 2 - AcrossContextPostProcessorModule [resources: AcrossContextPostProcessorModule]: class com.foreach.across.core.AcrossContextConfigurationModule
AcrossBootstrapper: ---
AcrossConfig: Creating a default ConversionService as no valid bean 'conversionService' is present
AcrossBootstrapper:
AcrossBootstrapper: --- Starting module bootstrap
AcrossBootstrapper:
AcrossBootstrapper: 1 - ModuleOne [resources: ModuleOne]: class com.example.demo.modules.one.ModuleOne
AcrossDevelopmentMode: Across development mode active: false
InternalComponentOne: Component created: class com.example.demo.modules.one.InternalComponentOne
AcrossBootstrapper:
AcrossBootstrapper: 2 - AcrossContextPostProcessorModule [resources: AcrossContextPostProcessorModule]: class com.foreach.across.core.AcrossContextConfigurationModule
AcrossBootstrapper: Nothing to be done - disabling module
AcrossBootstrapper: --- Module bootstrap finished: 1 modules started
AcrossBootstrapper:
AcrossContext: Shutdown signal received - destroying ApplicationContext instances
----

So far we have added a single module to our application, and tested it in isolation.
Let's make things a bit more interesting and create a second module.

Commit message:

Update the modular monoliths series

docs/guides/modules/ROOT/pages/modular-monoliths/1-creating-a-module.adoc, after:

= Creating an application and modules

[abstract]
--
This section covers the basics of creating an Across application and module, it shows how to:

* [*] Create a new Across application using the initializr
* [*] Run and test your application
* [*] Define a custom Across module and add it to your application
* [*] Test your Across module separately

This how-to is part of the xref:modular-monoliths/index.adoc[Building a modular monolith] series.
--

== Creating our application
Let's start by creating our Spring Boot application.

Go to http://start-across.foreach.be and ensure that the option `Blank Across application without any modules` is selected.
Click on `Generate project`, download, unzip to a folder and import the project via the `pom.xml` in your favorite IDE.

When unzipped, you should see the following folder structure:

.Project structure
[source]
----
src/
  main/
    java/
      com/example/demo/
        application/
        DemoApplication.java
    resources/
      application.yml
      application-dev.yml
      application-prod.yml
      build.properties
  test/
    java/
      com/example/demo/application/
      it/
        ITDemoApplication.java
.gitignore
README.md
lombok.config
pom.xml
----

There's only 2 java classes added:

* `DemoApplication` which represents the Spring Boot application
* `ITDemoApplication` which is an integration test for bootstrapping the application

Let's a have quick look at the source code of `DemoApplication`:

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/DemoApplication.java
[source,java]
----
@AcrossApplication(
		modules = {

		}
)
public class DemoApplication
{
	public static void main( String[] args ) {
		SpringApplication springApplication = new SpringApplication( DemoApplication.class );
		springApplication.setDefaultProperties( Collections.singletonMap( "spring.config.location", "${user.home}/dev-configs/demo-application.yml" ) );
		springApplication.run( args );
	}
}
----

This is run as a `SpringApplication` but instead of `@SpringBootApplication` the class is annotated with `@AcrossApplication` signaling we want to bootstrap as a modular application based on Across.

In an Across application we also call this file the *application descriptor*.

Currently our application descriptor is empty, there are no modules added to it.
Let's boot up our newly created application.

=== Run the application

You can simply execute the `DemoApplication` `main` method to run the application.
From a terminal you can also use the following command:

 $ mvn spring-boot:run

When starting up the application, you should find the following in the console output:

[source]
----
: ---
: AcrossContext: DemoApplication (AcrossContext-1)
: Bootstrapping 2 modules in the following order:
: 1 - DemoApplicationModule [resources: demo]: class com.foreach.across.core.DynamicAcrossModule$DynamicApplicationModule
: 2 - AcrossContextPostProcessorModule [resources: AcrossContextPostProcessorModule]: class com.foreach.across.core.AcrossContextConfigurationModule
: ---
----

This is a very important piece of information for our application: it tells us which modules are being started and in which order.
We will come back to this later on, but you should make sure you can always easily retrieve this from the logs.

Even though we don't specify any modules ourselves, we can see that the application bootstraps 2 modules that are added by default.
You can ignore these for now, we'll explain them towards the end of this post.

=== Testing the application

Apart from running the main class, you should also be able to run the integration test: `ITDemoApplication`.

If you want to run all integration tests from the terminal, you can do:

 $ mvn integration-test

But usually I just execute the test class or test method directly from the IDE.

The integration tests bootstraps the entire `DemoApplication` as well, and is pre-configured for a Spring MVC testing scenario (using `MockMvc`).
We won't be using that in the rest of this tutorial however.

== Adding a component

Now that we can boot up our application, let's add some code to it.
Let's start by adding a component in the same package as the `DemoApplication` class.

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/ComponentOne.java
[source,java]
----
package com.example.demo;

@Component
@Slf4j
public class ComponentOne
{
	public ComponentOne() {
		LOG.info( "Component created: {}", getClass() );
	}
}
----

This class declares a simple bean component that should get instantiated when Spring scans the package for all classes annotated with `@Component`.
However, when you re-run the application integration test, you *should not find* the test _Component created_ anywhere, meaning our component actually did not get created.

WARNING: If you do find the output, you probably added the component to the `application` child package.
Move it next to the `DemoApplication` instead, we will explain the purpose of the `application` package at the end of this post.

In a regular `@SpringBootApplication` we would expect Spring Boot to scan the root package and all child packages below for components.
An `@AcrossApplication` however encourages you to bundle your components in separate modules, and to only treat the application class as a descriptor for which modules should be added.

In fact, if you were to manually add a `@ComponentScan` directly on the `DemoApplication` class, starting the application would fail altogether (with a specific error message).

In order to continue, we must put our component in an Across module.

== Creating an Across module

Every module is identified by a unique name and a _module descriptor_, a class extending `AcrossModule`.
As a convention and to help you separate your code, each module usually resides in its own base package.

Let's create a package `com.example.demo.modules.one` and add a module descriptor to it:

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/modules/one/ModuleOne.java
[source,java]
----
package com.example.demo.modules.one;

public class ModuleOne extends AcrossModule
{
	public static final String NAME = "ModuleOne";

	@Override
	public String getName() {
		return NAME;
	}

	@Override
	protected void registerDefaultApplicationContextConfigurers( Set<ApplicationContextConfigurer> contextConfigurers ) {
		contextConfigurers.add( ComponentScanConfigurer.forAcrossModule( ModuleOne.class ) );
	}
}
----

This class is a module descriptor that defines a module named `ModuleOne`, and configures it so it scans its package for components when starting up.

Let's move the previously created `ComponentOne` to the same package and rename it to `InternalComponentOne`.

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/modules/one/InternalComponentOne.java
[source,java]
----
package com.example.demo.modules.one;

@Component
@Slf4j
public class InternalComponentOne
{
	public InternalComponentOne() {
		LOG.info( "Component created: {}", getClass() );
	}
}
----

You should end up with the following project structure:

[source]
----
com.example.demo/
  modules/
    one/
      ModuleOne
      InternalComponentOne
  DemoApplication
----

We have defined a new module (`ModuleOne`) which will contain a single component (`InternalComponentOne`) when it is started.
All that's left to do is to add our newly defined module to our application.
We can do that by adding the module descriptor as a bean in the `DemoApplication`:

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/DemoApplication.java
[source,java]
----

@AcrossApplication(
public class DemoApplication {
    @Bean
    public ModuleOne moduleOne() {
        return new ModuleOne();
    }

    ...
}
----

If you now run the integration test or re-start the application, you should see that `ModuleOne` was added and that `InternalComponentOne` got created.

.Console output excerpt
[source]
----
: ---:
: AcrossContext: DemoApplication (AcrossContext-1)
: Bootstrapping 3 modules in the following order:
: 1 - ModuleOne [resources: ModuleOne]: class com.example.demo.modules.one.ModuleOne
: 2 - DemoApplicationModule [resources: demo]: class com.foreach.across.core.DynamicAcrossModule$DynamicApplicationModule
: 3 - AcrossContextPostProcessorModule [resources: AcrossContextPostProcessorModule]: class com.foreach.across.core.AcrossContextConfigurationModule
: ---
: ...
: --- Starting module bootstrap
:
: 1 - ModuleOne [resources: ModuleOne]: class com.example.demo.modules.one.ModuleOne
: Refreshing ModuleOne: startup date [Wed Sep 26 08:57:46 CEST 2018]; parent: AcrossContext-1
: ...
: Component created: class com.example.demo.modules.one.InternalComponentOne
:
: 2 - DemoApplicationModule [resources: demo]: class com.foreach.across.core.DynamicAcrossModule$DynamicApplicationModule
----

== Testing an Across module in isolation

Part of the modularization aspect is that it should help you define and manage your dependencies.
As such it is also important that you can test your modules in isolation: with the minimum set of required dependencies.

Our newly created `ModuleOne` does not declare any explicit dependencies on other modules.
So let's create a separate integration test that bootstraps our module all by itself.

We can do so by using the `across-test` features that have automatically been added to the project.

Create a new test class which we will use for separate module integration testing:

.src/test/java/test/TestModuleBootstrapScenarios.java
[source,java]
----
@Slf4j
public class TestModuleBootstrapScenarios
{
	@Test
	public void moduleOneShouldBootstrapInIsolation() {
		try (AcrossTestContext ignore = AcrossTestBuilders.standard( false )
		                                                  .modules( new ModuleOne() )
		                                                  .build()) {
			LOG.trace( "Bootstrap successful." );
		}
	}
}
----

This test creates an Across context configuration that only starts `ModuleOne`.
Since we do not need any web features, we create a `standard` configuration.
And since we do not require a database, we disable the default test datasource (the `false` argument).
The latter simply ensures that our test executes a bit faster.

We're using a try-with-resources approach to ensure that everything gets cleaned up nicely afterwards.
Our test simply checks that starting up works and writes a log message, we don't validate anything else.

You should now have the following structure for your test code:

[source]
----
src/
  test/
    java
      com.example.demo/
      it/
        ITDemoApplication.java
      test/
        TestModuleBootstrapScenarios.java
----


.A note about the tests package structure
****
We have created no less than 3 package structures for our tests.
This is not any form of requirement but simply a conventional approach we prefer:

* `com.example.demo` contains the actual unit tests, often tests that reside in the same package as the units of code they are testing
* `test` contains partial integration tests, integration tests for "parts of the application"
* `it` contains the full-stack integration tests, in this case tests that bootstrap the entire application

In the Maven configuration provided by the initializr, the `it` integration tests are only run with the `integration-test` goal, whereas all others are executed when using `mvn test`.

****

You should be able to execute test `moduleOneShouldBootstrapInIsolation()` successfully and find the following in the console output:

.Test console output excerpt
[source]
----
---
AcrossContext: AcrossContext-1 (AcrossContext-1)
Bootstrapping 2 modules in the following order:
1 - ModuleOne [resources: ModuleOne]: class com.example.demo.modules.one.ModuleOne
2 - AcrossContextPostProcessorModule [resources: AcrossContextPostProcessorModule]: class com.foreach.across.core.AcrossContextConfigurationModule
---
----

The `DemoApplicationModule` - a feature of using the `@AcrossApplication` annotation - is now no longer available.
The `AcrossContextPostProcessorModule` is automatically added by the Across framework and cannot be removed, it always exists.

=== Cleaning up the test logging output

You might notice that you get a lot more logging output when running this unit test.
This is because when using `@AcrossApplication` a default logging configuration gets initialized, but that is not the case when using the `AcrossTestBuilders`.

The easiest way to fix this is to provide a `logback-test.xml` in your test resources, and to import a pre-configured sample configuration which comes with the `across-test` dependency.

.src/test/resources/logback-test.xml
[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<configuration>
	<include resource="logback-across-test.xml"/>
</configuration>
----

When added correctly, this should be the full console output of running `moduleOneShouldBootstrapInIsolation()`:

.Console output with logback-test.xml in place
[source,xml]
----
AcrossBootstrapper: ---
AcrossBootstrapper: AcrossContext: AcrossContext-1 (AcrossContext-1)
AcrossBootstrapper: Bootstrapping 2 modules in the following order:
AcrossBootstrapper: 1 - ModuleOne [resources: ModuleOne]: class com.example.demo.modules.one.ModuleOne
AcrossBootstrapper: 2 - AcrossContextPostProcessorModule [resources: AcrossContextPostProcessorModule]: class com.foreach.across.core.AcrossContextConfigurationModule
AcrossBootstrapper: ---
AcrossConfig: Creating a default ConversionService as no valid bean 'conversionService' is present
AcrossBootstrapper:
AcrossBootstrapper: --- Starting module bootstrap
AcrossBootstrapper:
AcrossBootstrapper: 1 - ModuleOne [resources: ModuleOne]: class com.example.demo.modules.one.ModuleOne
AcrossDevelopmentMode: Across development mode active: false
InternalComponentOne: Component created: class com.example.demo.modules.one.InternalComponentOne
AcrossBootstrapper:
AcrossBootstrapper: 2 - AcrossContextPostProcessorModule [resources: AcrossContextPostProcessorModule]: class com.foreach.across.core.AcrossContextConfigurationModule
AcrossBootstrapper: Nothing to be done - disabling module
AcrossBootstrapper: --- Module bootstrap finished: 1 modules started
AcrossBootstrapper:
AcrossContext: Shutdown signal received - destroying ApplicationContext instances
----

So far we have added a single module to our application, and tested it in isolation.
Let's make things a bit more interesting and xref:modular-monoliths/2-module-dependencies.adoc[add a second module].
