docs/guides/modules/ROOT/pages/modular-monoliths/3-using-module-components.adoc, before:

== Component ordering

We created `ExposedComponentOne` as an implementation of `Supplier<String>`.
Let's create another new module which has a component that retrieves all `Supplier<String>` implementations and returns their class names.

Start by adding the module descriptor for `ModuleThree` which declares a dependency on `ModuleOne`:

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/modules/three/ModuleThree.java
[source,java]
----
package com.example.demo.modules.three;

@AcrossDepends(required="ModuleOne")
public class ModuleThree extends AcrossModule
{
	@Override
	public String getName() {
		return "ModuleThree";
	}

	@Override
	protected void registerDefaultApplicationContextConfigurers( Set<ApplicationContextConfigurer> contextConfigurers ) {
		contextConfigurers.add( ComponentScanConfigurer.forAcrossModule( ModuleThree.class ) );
	}
}
----

Add a `SupplierService` component which wires all `Supplier<String>` beans.

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/modules/three/SupplierService.java
[source,java]
----
package com.example.demo.modules.three;

@Service
@RequiredArgsConstructor
public class SupplierService
{
	private Collection<Supplier<String>> suppliers = Collections.emptyList();

	@Autowired
	public void setSuppliers( Collection<Supplier<String>> suppliers ) {
		this.suppliers = suppliers;
	}

	public Collection<String> getSupplierNames() {
		return suppliers.stream()
		                .map( Object::getClass )
		                .map( Class::getSimpleName )
		                .collect( Collectors.toList() );
	}
}
----

Because we will change it later on, we deliberately use setter injection with `@Autowired` in this class.

We want to have the `SupplierService` exposed for other modules, but instead of a regular `@Component @Exposed` we use the `@Service` annotation.
Beans annotated with `@Service` are exposed by default.

Your project structure should now look like:

[source]
----
com.example.demo/
  modules/
    one/
      ModuleOne
      InternalComponentOne
      ExposedComponentOne
    two/
      ModuleTwo
      InternalComponentTwo
    three/
      ModuleThree.java
      SupplierService.java
  DemoApplication
----

Add an integration test to check that our `SupplierService` finds the `ExposedComponentOne` implementation.

.src/test/java/test/TestModuleBootstrapScenarios.java
[source,java]
----
@Test
public void supplierServiceFromModuleThreeListsDetectedSuppliers() {
    try (AcrossTestContext ctx = AcrossTestBuilders.standard(false)
            .modules(new ModuleThree(), new ModuleOne())
            .build()) {
        SupplierService supplierService = ctx.getBeanOfType(SupplierService.class);
        assertEquals(Collections.singletonList("ExposedComponentOne"), supplierService.getSupplierNames());
    }
}
----

This test should succeed:

* because of the module dependencies, `ModuleThree` starts after `ModuleOne` and can access the exposed `ExposedComponentOne`
* `SupplierService` is created with the list of `Supplier<String>` beans it can find, which currently is only `ExposedComponentOne`
* `SupplierService` is itself is exposed and can be accessed from the unit test

=== Adding an exposed component

Let's also add an exposed component implementing `Supplier<String>` to `ModuleTwo`:

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/modules/two/ExposedComponentTwo.java
[source,java]
----
package com.example.demo.modules.two;

@Component
@Exposed
public class ExposedComponentTwo implements Supplier<String>
{
	@Override
	public String get() {
		return "hello from module two";
	}
}
----

If we want to ensure that our `SupplierService` can also detect this component, we now also need to make sure that `ModuleThree` starts after `ModuleTwo`.
We could add another required dependency, but that would mean that `ModuleThree` will only start if both `ModuleOne` and `ModuleTwo` are present.

But what if we simply want `ModuleThree` to list the available suppliers, without enforcing any other modules to be present?

=== Optional module dependencies

Suppose we change our integration test for the the `SupplierService` to the following:

.src/test/java/test/TestModuleBootstrapScenarios.java
[source,java]
----
@Test
public void supplierServiceFromModuleThreeListsDetectedSuppliersInOrder() {
    expectSuppliers( Collections.emptyList() );
    expectSuppliers( Collections.singletonList( "ExposedComponentOne" ), new ModuleOne() );
    expectSuppliers( Arrays.asList( "ExposedComponentOne", "ExposedComponentTwo" ), new ModuleOne(), new ModuleTwo() );
}

private void expectSuppliers( Collection<String> names, AcrossModule... additionalModules ) {
    try (AcrossTestContext ctx = AcrossTestBuilders.standard( false )
                                                   .modules( new ModuleThree() )
                                                   .modules( additionalModules )
                                                   .build()) {
        SupplierService supplierService = ctx.getBeanOfType( SupplierService.class );
        assertEquals( names, supplierService.getSupplierNames() );
    }
}
----

This test bootstraps different module combinations, and tests that the `SupplierService` always detects the correct set of suppliers.

One way we can make this test succeed is to put optional dependencies on `ModuleThree`:

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/modules/three/ModuleThree.java
[source,java]
----
@AcrossDepends(optional={"ModuleOne", "ModuleTwo"})
public class ModuleThree extends AcrossModule
{
	...
}
----

And to make the `Collection<Supplier<String>>` dependency optional as well:

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/modules/three/SupplierService.java
[source,java]
----
public class SupplierService
{
    ...
    @Autowired(required=false)
    public void setSuppliers(Collection<Supplier<String>> suppliers) {
        this.suppliers = suppliers;
    }
    ....
}
----

The difference between a required and an optional module dependency is as follows:

* If a required dependency is missing, the bootstrap will fail. If an optional dependency is missing, bootstrap will continue as normal.
* Cyclic required dependencies are not allowed, and a required dependency is guaranteed to have started before the module depending on it.
Cyclic optional dependencies are not advised but possible: a best-effort attempt will be made to start an optional dependency before the module depending on it.

Even though the test is now successful, this is not an optimal approach: whenever we add another module we would have to update the `ModuleThree` dependencies to ensure it can detect the `Supplier`.
A different way to tackle this type of problem is to use a refreshable collection.

=== Using a refreshable collection

A refreshable collection is a collection type dependency that will update itself once all modules in an application have been started.

Remove `@AcrossDepends` from the `ModuleThree` class, and replace the `@Autowired(required=false)` from the `SupplierService` by `@RefreshableCollection`:

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/modules/three/SupplierService.java
[source,java]
----
public class SupplierService
{
    ...
    @RefreshableCollection
    public void setSuppliers(Collection<Supplier<String>> suppliers) {
        this.suppliers = suppliers;
    }
    ....
}
----

When you run the tests you will see they all succeed.
Even though `ModuleThree` no longer has any module dependencies and might even bootstrap before `ModuleOne` and `ModuleTwo`, the collection of suppliers is always up-to-date once the entire application has started.

Another very important fact is that result of `SupplierService.getSupplierNames()` is deterministic.
No matter how many times you re-run the test, it will always succeed, meaning that the beans are always returned in exactly the same order.

When you get a collection of beans from different modules, they will be implicitly ordered in the bootstrap order of the modules that defined them.

We find the same reliable ordering principle in event handling as well, let's look at an example with events.

Commit message:

Update the modular monoliths series

docs/guides/modules/ROOT/pages/modular-monoliths/3-using-module-components.adoc, after:

= Using module components

[abstract]
--
This section goes a bit more in depth on sharing components between modules, it explains:

* [*] Component ordering and how it is impacted by module dependencies
* [*] Optional module dependencies
* [*] How you can refresh a collection of components without module dependencies

This how-to is part of the xref:modular-monoliths/index.adoc[Building a modular monolith] series.
It continues directly from the previous how-to on xref:modular-monoliths/2-module-dependencies.adoc[Module dependencies].
--

== Component ordering

We created `ExposedComponentOne` as an implementation of `Supplier<String>`.
Let's create another new module which has a component that retrieves all `Supplier<String>` implementations and returns their class names.

Start by adding the module descriptor for `ModuleThree` which declares a dependency on `ModuleOne`:

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/modules/three/ModuleThree.java
[source,java]
----
package com.example.demo.modules.three;

@AcrossDepends(required="ModuleOne")
public class ModuleThree extends AcrossModule
{
	@Override
	public String getName() {
		return "ModuleThree";
	}

	@Override
	protected void registerDefaultApplicationContextConfigurers( Set<ApplicationContextConfigurer> contextConfigurers ) {
		contextConfigurers.add( ComponentScanConfigurer.forAcrossModule( ModuleThree.class ) );
	}
}
----

Add a `SupplierService` component which wires all `Supplier<String>` beans.

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/modules/three/SupplierService.java
[source,java]
----
package com.example.demo.modules.three;

@Service
@RequiredArgsConstructor
public class SupplierService
{
	private Collection<Supplier<String>> suppliers = Collections.emptyList();

	@Autowired
	public void setSuppliers( Collection<Supplier<String>> suppliers ) {
		this.suppliers = suppliers;
	}

	public Collection<String> getSupplierNames() {
		return suppliers.stream()
		                .map( Object::getClass )
		                .map( Class::getSimpleName )
		                .collect( Collectors.toList() );
	}
}
----

Because we will change it later on, we deliberately use setter injection with `@Autowired` in this class.

We want to have the `SupplierService` exposed for other modules, but instead of a regular `@Component @Exposed` we use the `@Service` annotation.
Beans annotated with `@Service` are exposed by default.

Your project structure should now look like:

[source]
----
com.example.demo/
  modules/
    one/
      ModuleOne
      InternalComponentOne
      ExposedComponentOne
    two/
      ModuleTwo
      InternalComponentTwo
    three/
      ModuleThree.java
      SupplierService.java
  DemoApplication
----

Add an integration test to check that our `SupplierService` finds the `ExposedComponentOne` implementation.

.src/test/java/test/TestModuleBootstrapScenarios.java
[source,java]
----
@Test
public void supplierServiceFromModuleThreeListsDetectedSuppliers() {
    try (AcrossTestContext ctx = AcrossTestBuilders.standard(false)
            .modules(new ModuleThree(), new ModuleOne())
            .build()) {
        SupplierService supplierService = ctx.getBeanOfType(SupplierService.class);
        assertEquals(Collections.singletonList("ExposedComponentOne"), supplierService.getSupplierNames());
    }
}
----

This test should succeed:

* because of the module dependencies, `ModuleThree` starts after `ModuleOne` and can access the exposed `ExposedComponentOne`
* `SupplierService` is created with the list of `Supplier<String>` beans it can find, which currently is only `ExposedComponentOne`
* `SupplierService` is itself is exposed and can be accessed from the unit test

=== Adding an exposed component

Let's also add an exposed component implementing `Supplier<String>` to `ModuleTwo`:

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/modules/two/ExposedComponentTwo.java
[source,java]
----
package com.example.demo.modules.two;

@Component
@Exposed
public class ExposedComponentTwo implements Supplier<String>
{
	@Override
	public String get() {
		return "hello from module two";
	}
}
----

If we want to ensure that our `SupplierService` can also detect this component, we now also need to make sure that `ModuleThree` starts after `ModuleTwo`.
We could add another required dependency, but that would mean that `ModuleThree` will only start if both `ModuleOne` and `ModuleTwo` are present.

But what if we simply want `ModuleThree` to list the available suppliers, without enforcing any other modules to be present?

=== Optional module dependencies

Suppose we change our integration test for the the `SupplierService` to the following:

.src/test/java/test/TestModuleBootstrapScenarios.java
[source,java]
----
@Test
public void supplierServiceFromModuleThreeListsDetectedSuppliersInOrder() {
    expectSuppliers( Collections.emptyList() );
    expectSuppliers( Collections.singletonList( "ExposedComponentOne" ), new ModuleOne() );
    expectSuppliers( Arrays.asList( "ExposedComponentOne", "ExposedComponentTwo" ), new ModuleOne(), new ModuleTwo() );
}

private void expectSuppliers( Collection<String> names, AcrossModule... additionalModules ) {
    try (AcrossTestContext ctx = AcrossTestBuilders.standard( false )
                                                   .modules( new ModuleThree() )
                                                   .modules( additionalModules )
                                                   .build()) {
        SupplierService supplierService = ctx.getBeanOfType( SupplierService.class );
        assertEquals( names, supplierService.getSupplierNames() );
    }
}
----

This test bootstraps different module combinations, and tests that the `SupplierService` always detects the correct set of suppliers.

One way we can make this test succeed is to put optional dependencies on `ModuleThree`:

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/modules/three/ModuleThree.java
[source,java]
----
@AcrossDepends(optional={"ModuleOne", "ModuleTwo"})
public class ModuleThree extends AcrossModule
{
	...
}
----

And to make the `Collection<Supplier<String>>` dependency optional as well:

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/modules/three/SupplierService.java
[source,java]
----
public class SupplierService
{
    ...
    @Autowired(required=false)
    public void setSuppliers(Collection<Supplier<String>> suppliers) {
        this.suppliers = suppliers;
    }
    ....
}
----

The difference between a required and an optional module dependency is as follows:

* If a required dependency is missing, the bootstrap will fail. If an optional dependency is missing, bootstrap will continue as normal.
* Cyclic required dependencies are not allowed, and a required dependency is guaranteed to have started before the module depending on it.
Cyclic optional dependencies are not advised but possible: a best-effort attempt will be made to start an optional dependency before the module depending on it.

Even though the test is now successful, this is not an optimal approach: whenever we add another module we would have to update the `ModuleThree` dependencies to ensure it can detect the `Supplier`.
A different way to tackle this type of problem is to use a refreshable collection.

=== Using a refreshable collection

A refreshable collection is a collection type dependency that will update itself once all modules in an application have been started.

Remove `@AcrossDepends` from the `ModuleThree` class, and replace the `@Autowired(required=false)` from the `SupplierService` by `@RefreshableCollection`:

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/modules/three/SupplierService.java
[source,java]
----
public class SupplierService
{
    ...
    @RefreshableCollection
    public void setSuppliers(Collection<Supplier<String>> suppliers) {
        this.suppliers = suppliers;
    }
    ....
}
----

When you run the tests you will see they all succeed.
Even though `ModuleThree` no longer has any module dependencies and might even bootstrap before `ModuleOne` and `ModuleTwo`, the collection of suppliers is always up-to-date once the entire application has started.

Another very important fact is that result of `SupplierService.getSupplierNames()` is deterministic.
No matter how many times you re-run the test, it will always succeed, meaning that the beans are always returned in exactly the same order.

When you get a collection of beans from different modules, they will be implicitly ordered in the bootstrap order of the modules that defined them.

We find the same reliable ordering principle in event handling as well, let's look at an xref:modular-monoliths/4-working-with-events.adoc[example with events].
