docs/guides/modules/ROOT/pages/modular-monoliths/4-working-with-events.adoc, before:

== Working with events

Just like with distributed systems, using events for inter-module communication can be a very effective way to reduce coupling in your application.
Working with events in an Across application is done with the exact same features as in a regular Spring application, but module ordering influences how events are handled.
Let's have a look.

Create a sample `SomeEvent` class which we will publish.
In this case, put it in the `com.example.demo.modules` package to illustrate it is part of the code shared between all modules.

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/modules/SomeEvent.java
[source,java]
----
package com.example.demo.modules;

import java.util.ArrayList;

public class SomeEvent extends ArrayList<String>
{
}
----

Our event is nothing more than an `ArrayList` implementation to which every listener will add its own name.

Update the `SupplierService` with a new method which publishes the event and returns the names of all listeners that handled it.
At the same time, add an `@EventListener` method in the `SupplierService` which listens for the same event.

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/modules/three/SupplierService.java
[source,java]
----
@Service
@RequiredArgsConstructor
public class SupplierService
{
	private final ApplicationEventPublisher eventPublisher;

	...

	public Collection<String> getEventListeners() {
		SomeEvent event = new SomeEvent();
		eventPublisher.publishEvent( event );
		return event;
	}

	@EventListener
	public void receive( SomeEvent event ) {
		event.add( getClass().getSimpleName() );
	}
}
----

Also add some event listeners to the internal components of both `ModuleOne` and `ModuleTwo`

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/moduls/one/InternalComponentOne.java
[source,java]
----
@Component
@Slf4j
public class InternalComponentOne
{
	...

	@EventListener
	public void receive( SomeEvent event ) {
		event.add( getClass().getSimpleName() );
	}
}
----

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/moduls/two/InternalComponentTwo.java
[source,java]
----
@Component
@Slf4j
public class InternalComponentTwo
{
	...

	@EventListener
	public void receive( SomeEvent event ) {
		event.add( getClass().getSimpleName() );
	}
}
----

And finally write an integration test that bootstraps our modules and verifies the list of event listeners.

.src/test/java/test/TestModuleBootstrapScenarios.java
[source,java]
----
@Test
public void eventIsHandledInModuleOrder() {
    try (AcrossTestContext ctx = AcrossTestBuilders.standard( false )
                                                   .modules( new ModuleThree(), new ModuleOne(), new ModuleTwo() )
                                                   .build()) {
        SupplierService supplierService = ctx.getBeanOfType( SupplierService.class );
        assertEquals( Arrays.asList( "SupplierService", "InternalComponentOne", "InternalComponentTwo" ), supplierService.getEventListeners() );
    }
}
----

No matter how often you run it, this test should always succeed.
Without explicit ordering on the `@EventListener` methods, the bootstrap order ensures that events are always handled in the same order.

Here is a run-down of what happens exactly:

. the modules are bootstrapped in the order `ModuleThree`, `ModuleOne`, `ModuleTwo`
. `SomeEvent` is published by the `SupplierService` inside `ModuleThree`
. `SomeEvent` is handled by `SupplierService.receive()`
. `SomeEvent` is handled by `InternalComponentOne.receive()`
. `SomeEvent` is handled by `InternalComponentTwo.receive()`

Even though `SupplierService` publishes the event, it will always be handled in module order.
This is might seem obvious with the above example, but let's shift the order around in our test:

 .modules( new ModuleTwo(), new ModuleThree(), new ModuleOne() )

If we simply re-run the test it now fails, as the order of handlers has changed.
Let's go over it step-by-step:

. the modules are now bootstrapped in the order `ModuleOne`, `ModuleTwo`, `ModuleThree`
. `SomeEvent` is published by the `SupplierService` inside `ModuleThree`
. `SomeEvent` is handled by `InternalComponentOne.receive()`
. `SomeEvent` is handled by `InternalComponentTwo.receive()`
. `SomeEvent` is handled by `SupplierService.receive()`

Because `ModuleTwo` has a dependency on `ModuleOne`, the relative ordering of those two modules will always be the same.
`ModuleThree` has no dependencies, and because the registration order of our configuration has changed, it is now bootstrapped as the last module.
Even though the event is published by that module, it is last when it comes to handling that same event!

Properly using events is a great way for building extensibility.
The same event will always be handled by any module you depend on, before it is handed to you.
Note also that any component can handle an event, event listeners do not need to be exposed.

== Implicit and explicit ordering

We've illustrated the impact of ordering on components and event handling.

In a regular Spring application most components are considered not-ordered unless they are explicitly ordered.
Beans will be returned in order if they implement `Ordered` or have the `@Order` annotation.
If they have neither of these, the order in which they will be returned cannot reliably be determined.
The same goes for `@EventListener` methods, unless explicitly ordered using `@Order`, the handling order is non-deterministic.

In an Across based modular application, the order of a lot of things is implicit.
Because module A depends on module B, it will be ordered after it, which means:

* components from B will be created before the ones from A (B will bootstrap before A)
* _unless otherwise specified_: components from B will be ordered before the ones from A in retrieval/auto-wiring scenarios
* _unless otherwise specified_: events will be handled by event listeners from B before the ones from A, no matter who publishes the event

Of course sometimes it is required to break out of the default behaviour, which is still possible (_unless otherwise specified_):

* using `@OrderInModule` and equivalents you can order components inside a single module
* using `@Order` you can influence the global ordering in your application

To illustrate this, let's revisit the failing test from above, and update the `SupplierService`:

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/modules/three/SupplierService.java
[source,java]
----
@Service
@RequiredArgsConstructor
public class SupplierService
{
    ...

	@EventListener
	@Order(Ordered.HIGHEST_PRECEDENCE)
	public void receive( SomeEvent event ) {
		event.add( getClass().getSimpleName() );
	}
}
----

Re-run and you will see the test is green again.
The `@Order(HIGHEST_PRECEDENCE)` breaks out of the default ordering and pushes that event listener to the very top of the handling queue.

Going into the details of how the ordering works behind the scene would lead us too far, but suffice to say that reliable default ordering is a cornerstone of building modular monoliths with Spring Boot and Across.

Commit message:

Update the modular monoliths series

docs/guides/modules/ROOT/pages/modular-monoliths/4-working-with-events.adoc, after:

= Working with events

[abstract]
--
This section covers event handling in an Across application, it explains:

* [*] How to publish and handle events
* [*] How event handling order is determined by the module dependencies
* [*] The difference between implicit and explicit ordering

This how-to is part of the xref:modular-monoliths/index.adoc[Building a modular monolith] series.
It continues directly from the previous how-to on xref:modular-monoliths/3-using-module-components.adoc[Using module components].
--

== Publishing and handling events

Just like with distributed systems, using events for inter-module communication can be a very effective way to reduce coupling in your application.
Working with events in an Across application is done with the exact same features as in a regular Spring application, but module ordering influences how events are handled.
Let's have a look.

Create a sample `SomeEvent` class which we will publish.
In this case, put it in the `com.example.demo.modules` package to illustrate it is part of the code shared between all modules.

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/modules/SomeEvent.java
[source,java]
----
package com.example.demo.modules;

import java.util.ArrayList;

public class SomeEvent extends ArrayList<String>
{
}
----

Our event is nothing more than an `ArrayList` implementation to which every listener will add its own name.

Update the `SupplierService` with a new method which publishes the event and returns the names of all listeners that handled it.
At the same time, add an `@EventListener` method in the `SupplierService` which listens for the same event.

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/modules/three/SupplierService.java
[source,java]
----
@Service
@RequiredArgsConstructor
public class SupplierService
{
	private final ApplicationEventPublisher eventPublisher;

	...

	public Collection<String> getEventListeners() {
		SomeEvent event = new SomeEvent();
		eventPublisher.publishEvent( event );
		return event;
	}

	@EventListener
	public void receive( SomeEvent event ) {
		event.add( getClass().getSimpleName() );
	}
}
----

Also add some event listeners to the internal components of both `ModuleOne` and `ModuleTwo`

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/moduls/one/InternalComponentOne.java
[source,java]
----
@Component
@Slf4j
public class InternalComponentOne
{
	...

	@EventListener
	public void receive( SomeEvent event ) {
		event.add( getClass().getSimpleName() );
	}
}
----

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/moduls/two/InternalComponentTwo.java
[source,java]
----
@Component
@Slf4j
public class InternalComponentTwo
{
	...

	@EventListener
	public void receive( SomeEvent event ) {
		event.add( getClass().getSimpleName() );
	}
}
----

And finally write an integration test that bootstraps our modules and verifies the list of event listeners.

.src/test/java/test/TestModuleBootstrapScenarios.java
[source,java]
----
@Test
public void eventIsHandledInModuleOrder() {
    try (AcrossTestContext ctx = AcrossTestBuilders.standard( false )
                                                   .modules( new ModuleThree(), new ModuleOne(), new ModuleTwo() )
                                                   .build()) {
        SupplierService supplierService = ctx.getBeanOfType( SupplierService.class );
        assertEquals( Arrays.asList( "SupplierService", "InternalComponentOne", "InternalComponentTwo" ), supplierService.getEventListeners() );
    }
}
----

No matter how often you run it, this test should always succeed.
Without explicit ordering on the `@EventListener` methods, the bootstrap order ensures that events are always handled in the same order.

Here is a run-down of what happens exactly:

. the modules are bootstrapped in the order `ModuleThree`, `ModuleOne`, `ModuleTwo`
. `SomeEvent` is published by the `SupplierService` inside `ModuleThree`
. `SomeEvent` is handled by `SupplierService.receive()`
. `SomeEvent` is handled by `InternalComponentOne.receive()`
. `SomeEvent` is handled by `InternalComponentTwo.receive()`

Even though `SupplierService` publishes the event, it will always be handled in module order.
This is might seem obvious with the above example, but let's shift the order around in our test:

 .modules( new ModuleTwo(), new ModuleThree(), new ModuleOne() )

If we simply re-run the test it now fails, as the order of handlers has changed.
Let's go over it step-by-step:

. the modules are now bootstrapped in the order `ModuleOne`, `ModuleTwo`, `ModuleThree`
. `SomeEvent` is published by the `SupplierService` inside `ModuleThree`
. `SomeEvent` is handled by `InternalComponentOne.receive()`
. `SomeEvent` is handled by `InternalComponentTwo.receive()`
. `SomeEvent` is handled by `SupplierService.receive()`

Because `ModuleTwo` has a dependency on `ModuleOne`, the relative ordering of those two modules will always be the same.
`ModuleThree` has no dependencies, and because the registration order of our configuration has changed, it is now bootstrapped as the last module.
Even though the event is published by that module, it is last when it comes to handling that same event!

Properly using events is a great way for building extensibility.
The same event will always be handled by any module you depend on, before it is handed to you.
Note also that any component can handle an event, event listeners do not need to be exposed.

== Implicit and explicit ordering

We've illustrated the impact of ordering on components and event handling.

In a regular Spring application most components are considered not-ordered unless they are explicitly ordered.
Beans will be returned in order if they implement `Ordered` or have the `@Order` annotation.
If they have neither of these, the order in which they will be returned cannot reliably be determined.
The same goes for `@EventListener` methods, unless explicitly ordered using `@Order`, the handling order is non-deterministic.

In an Across based modular application, the order of a lot of things is implicit.
Because module A depends on module B, it will be ordered after it, which means:

* components from B will be created before the ones from A (B will bootstrap before A)
* _unless otherwise specified_: components from B will be ordered before the ones from A in retrieval/auto-wiring scenarios
* _unless otherwise specified_: events will be handled by event listeners from B before the ones from A, no matter who publishes the event

Of course sometimes it is required to break out of the default behaviour, which is still possible (_unless otherwise specified_):

* using `@OrderInModule` and equivalents you can order components inside a single module
* using `@Order` you can influence the global ordering in your application

To illustrate this, let's revisit the failing test from above, and update the `SupplierService`:

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/modules/three/SupplierService.java
[source,java]
----
@Service
@RequiredArgsConstructor
public class SupplierService
{
    ...

	@EventListener
	@Order(Ordered.HIGHEST_PRECEDENCE)
	public void receive( SomeEvent event ) {
		event.add( getClass().getSimpleName() );
	}
}
----

Re-run and you will see the test is green again.
The `@Order(HIGHEST_PRECEDENCE)` breaks out of the default ordering and pushes that event listener to the very top of the handling queue.

Going into the details of how the ordering works behind the scene would lead us too far, but suffice to say that reliable default ordering is a cornerstone of building modular monoliths with Spring Boot and Across.

To continue this series, let's have a look at the xref:modular-monoliths/5-dynamic-application-module.adoc[Dynamic application module].
