docs/guides/modules/ROOT/pages/modular-monoliths/5-dynamic-application-module.adoc, before:

== Revisiting the Across application

Early on in this post I promised to get back to the `DemoApplicationModule` and `AcrossContextPostProcessorModule` that you get when running the `DemoApplication`.

.Console excerpt from starting the blank application
[source]
----
: ---
: AcrossContext: DemoApplication (AcrossContext-1)
: Bootstrapping 2 modules in the following order:
: 1 - DemoApplicationModule [resources: demo]: class com.foreach.across.core.DynamicAcrossModule$DynamicApplicationModule
: 2 - AcrossContextPostProcessorModule [resources: AcrossContextPostProcessorModule]: class com.foreach.across.core.AcrossContextConfigurationModule
: ---
----

I have already explained that the `AcrossContextPostProcessorModule` gets added to every Across based application.
It is a technical module and going into the details of this one would lead us too far for this first post.

The `DemoApplicationModule` however gets added because we use `@AcrossApplication`, and it is the equivalent of the base package in a regular `@SpringBootApplication`.
Across encourages you to bundle all your application code inside modules that interact with each other.
A top-level component scan is not allowed, but a default dynamic module is automatically added which uses the `application` child package as the module contents.

An `AcrossModule` descriptor is not required for this module, it is entirely package based.
Many Across applications use several shared modules and have a limited set of application-specific code using those module features.
The dynamic application module is the default spot to put all that application specific code.
It does not allow (or requires) you to define explicit dependencies but it always bootstraps after all other modules in the application.

=== Using the application module

Let's finish this tutorial with a small example of using the application module.
Update the `DemoApplication` to add our newly created modules:

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/DemoApplication.java
[source,java]
----
@AcrossApplication(
        modules = {

        }
)
public class DemoApplication {
    @Bean
    public ModuleOne moduleOne() {
        return new ModuleOne();
    }

    @Bean
    public ModuleTwo moduleTwo() {
        return new ModuleTwo();
    }

    @Bean
    public ModuleThree moduleThree() {
        return new ModuleThree();
    }

    public static void main(String[] args) {
        SpringApplication springApplication = new SpringApplication(DemoApplication.class);
        springApplication.setDefaultProperties(Collections.singletonMap("spring.config.location", "${user.home}/dev-configs/demo-application.yml"));
        springApplication.run(args);
    }
}
----

And add an application event listener to the `application` package:

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/application/ApplicationComponent.java
[source,java]
----
@Component
@Slf4j
public class ApplicationComponent {
    public ApplicationComponent() {
        LOG.info("Component created: {}", getClass());
    }

    @EventListener
    public void receive(SomeEvent event) {
        event.add(getClass().getSimpleName());
    }
}
----

Your project structure should look like:

[source]
----
com.example.demo/
  application/
    ApplicationComponent
  modules/
    SomeEvent
    one/
      ModuleOne
      InternalComponentOne
      ExposedComponentOne
    two/
      ModuleTwo
      InternalComponentTwo
      ExposedComponentTwo
    three/
      ModuleThree.java
      SupplierService.java
  DemoApplication
----

Our application module now also handles `SomeEvent`, let's update the application integration test `ITDemoApplication` to test for that:

.src/test/java/it/ITDemoApplication.java
[source,java]
----
public class ITDemoApplication {
    @Autowired
    private MockMvc mockMvc;

    @Autowired
    private SupplierService supplierService;

    @Test
    public void bootstrappedOk() throws Exception {
        // Test should really do something - but when it gets called, bootstrap has been successful
        assertNotNull(mockMvc);
    }

    @Test
    public void eventShouldBeHandledByAllModules() {
        assertEquals(
                Arrays.asList("SupplierService", "InternalComponentOne", "InternalComponentTwo", "ApplicationComponent"),
                supplierService.getEventListeners()
        );
    }
}
----

As `SupplierService` is an exposed component, we can auto-wire it directly in our Spring integration test class.

Running the `eventShouldBeHandledByAllModules()` test should succeed.
The test result illustrates that the `ApplicationComponent` gets created and the `@EventListener` method called.
If you look at the console output, you can clearly see that the `ApplicationComponent` is part of the automatically defined `DemoApplicationModule`.

Commit message:

Update the modular monoliths series

docs/guides/modules/ROOT/pages/modular-monoliths/5-dynamic-application-module.adoc, after:

= The dynamic application module

[abstract]
--
This section covers the dynamic application module.

This how-to is part of the xref:modular-monoliths/index.adoc[Building a modular monolith] series.
It continues directly from the previous how-to on xref:modular-monoliths/4-working-with-events.adoc[Working with events].
--

== Revisiting the Across application

Early on in this series I promised to get back to the `DemoApplicationModule` and `AcrossContextPostProcessorModule` that you get when running the `DemoApplication`.

.Console excerpt from starting the blank application
[source]
----
: ---
: AcrossContext: DemoApplication (AcrossContext-1)
: Bootstrapping 2 modules in the following order:
: 1 - DemoApplicationModule [resources: demo]: class com.foreach.across.core.DynamicAcrossModule$DynamicApplicationModule
: 2 - AcrossContextPostProcessorModule [resources: AcrossContextPostProcessorModule]: class com.foreach.across.core.AcrossContextConfigurationModule
: ---
----

I have already explained that the `AcrossContextPostProcessorModule` gets added to every Across based application.
It is a technical module and going into the details of this one would lead us too far for this first post.

The `DemoApplicationModule` however gets added because we use `@AcrossApplication`, and it is the equivalent of the base package in a regular `@SpringBootApplication`.
Across encourages you to bundle all your application code inside modules that interact with each other.
A top-level component scan is not allowed, but a default dynamic module is automatically added which uses the `application` child package as the module contents.

An `AcrossModule` descriptor is not required for this module, it is entirely package based.
Many Across applications use several shared modules and have a limited set of application-specific code using those module features.
The dynamic application module is the default spot to put all that application specific code.
It does not allow (or requires) you to define explicit dependencies but it always bootstraps after all other modules in the application.

== Using the application module

Let's finish this series with a small example of using the application module.
Update the `DemoApplication` to add our newly created modules:

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/DemoApplication.java
[source,java]
----
@AcrossApplication(
        modules = {

        }
)
public class DemoApplication {
    @Bean
    public ModuleOne moduleOne() {
        return new ModuleOne();
    }

    @Bean
    public ModuleTwo moduleTwo() {
        return new ModuleTwo();
    }

    @Bean
    public ModuleThree moduleThree() {
        return new ModuleThree();
    }

    public static void main(String[] args) {
        SpringApplication springApplication = new SpringApplication(DemoApplication.class);
        springApplication.setDefaultProperties(Collections.singletonMap("spring.config.location", "${user.home}/dev-configs/demo-application.yml"));
        springApplication.run(args);
    }
}
----

And add an application event listener to the `application` package:

.src/main/java/com/example/demo/application/ApplicationComponent.java
[source,java]
----
@Component
@Slf4j
public class ApplicationComponent {
    public ApplicationComponent() {
        LOG.info("Component created: {}", getClass());
    }

    @EventListener
    public void receive(SomeEvent event) {
        event.add(getClass().getSimpleName());
    }
}
----

Your project structure should look like:

[source]
----
com.example.demo/
  application/
    ApplicationComponent
  modules/
    SomeEvent
    one/
      ModuleOne
      InternalComponentOne
      ExposedComponentOne
    two/
      ModuleTwo
      InternalComponentTwo
      ExposedComponentTwo
    three/
      ModuleThree.java
      SupplierService.java
  DemoApplication
----

Our application module now also handles `SomeEvent`, let's update the application integration test `ITDemoApplication` to test for that:

.src/test/java/it/ITDemoApplication.java
[source,java]
----
public class ITDemoApplication {
    @Autowired
    private MockMvc mockMvc;

    @Autowired
    private SupplierService supplierService;

    @Test
    public void bootstrappedOk() throws Exception {
        // Test should really do something - but when it gets called, bootstrap has been successful
        assertNotNull(mockMvc);
    }

    @Test
    public void eventShouldBeHandledByAllModules() {
        assertEquals(
                Arrays.asList("SupplierService", "InternalComponentOne", "InternalComponentTwo", "ApplicationComponent"),
                supplierService.getEventListeners()
        );
    }
}
----

As `SupplierService` is an exposed component, we can auto-wire it directly in our Spring integration test class.

Running the `eventShouldBeHandledByAllModules()` test should succeed.
The test result illustrates that the `ApplicationComponent` gets created and the `@EventListener` method called.
If you look at the console output, you can clearly see that the `ApplicationComponent` is part of the automatically defined `DemoApplicationModule`.

== Wrapping it up
And so we come to the end of this introduction about building modular applications with Spring Boot and Across (for now).
We've focused on some basic concepts where the modular approach differs from a regular Spring Boot application.

Features like module dependencies, reliable ordering and event handling are the very basic building blocks you'll need.
We barely scratched the surface and there's plenty more to come.

In next posts we'll tackle:

* name based resolving and transitive loading of modules
* working with conditionals for modules and components inside modules
* how modules can manage their own installation and run data or schema migrations
* embedding resources like message codes or templates
