docs/guides/modules/ROOT/pages/modular-monoliths/index.adoc, before:

= Building a modular monolith with Spring Boot and Across

// For initial publication on foreach.be

Spring Boot is excellent for building Java applications, be it large monoliths or micro-services.
The challenge with monolithic applications is that the architecture often degrades over time, and some times they end up becoming a _big ball of mud_.

Developing your monoliths in a modular fashion can help you keep your architecture under control.
This is where Across framework comes into play, as it allows you to structure your Spring application with modules.

== About this post

In this post we'll be focusing on how you can define modules with Across, and how the modular approach is different from the regular Spring approach.

We'll explain:

* how to define an Across module and add it to your application
* how to define dependencies between modules
* how the bean creation differs from a regular Spring Boot application
* how module dependencies impact the ordering of modules, beans and the handling of events

You need to know some Spring Boot (or at least Spring framework), Java 8 and Maven to follow this tutorial.
We will also be using Lombok to generate some boilerplate code with annotations like `@Slf4j` and `@RequiredArgsConstructor`.

We take it very much step-by-step, explaining things on the way.
If you are more interested in the complete example, see the Github repository link at the end of this post.

So let's get started.

== Wrapping it up

And so we come to the end of this introduction about building modular applications with Spring Boot and Across.
We've focused on some basic concepts where the modular approach differs from a regular Spring Boot application.

Features like module dependencies, reliable ordering and event handling are the very basic building blocks you'll need.

We barely scratched the surface and there's plenty more to come.
In a next post we'll tackle:

* name based resolving and transitive loading of modules
* working with conditionals for modules and components inside modules
* how modules can manage their own installation and run data or schema migrations
* embedding resources like message codes or templates

In the meantime you can find more information on all things Across on https://across.foreach.be[across.foreach.be].

The full source code of this tutorial is available on: https://github.com/ForeachOS/blog-modular-monoliths-across

Commit message:

Update the modular monoliths series

docs/guides/modules/ROOT/pages/modular-monoliths/index.adoc, after:

= Building a modular monolith with Spring Boot and Across

[abstract]
--
This is a series of how-tos that give a high-level introduction to the concepts of Across and how to build an application with it.
This series was originally published as blog posts on https://www.foreach.be.
--

== Monolith applications
Spring Boot is excellent for building Java applications, be it large monoliths or micro-services.
The challenge with monolithic applications is that the architecture often degrades over time, and some times they end up becoming a _big ball of mud_.

Developing your monoliths in a modular fashion can help you keep your architecture under control.
This is where Across framework comes into play, as it allows you to structure your Spring application with modules.

== About the series

In this series we'll be focusing on how you can define modules with Across, and how the modular approach is different from the regular Spring approach.
Every post in the series builds on top of the previous one, so it is best to follow them in order.

These are step-by-step tutorials, explaining things on the way.

We'll explain:

* how to define an Across module and add it to your application
* how to define dependencies between modules
* how the bean creation differs from a regular Spring Boot application
* how module dependencies impact the ordering of modules, beans and the handling of events

== Requirements

You need to know some Spring Boot (or at least Spring framework), Java 8 and Maven to follow this tutorial.
We will also be using Lombok to generate some boilerplate code with annotations like `@Slf4j` and `@RequiredArgsConstructor`.

== Source code
The full source code of this tutorial is available on: https://github.com/ForeachOS/blog-modular-monoliths-across

== Getting started

Get started with the first post in the series: xref:modular-monoliths/1-creating-a-module.adoc[creating an application and modules].

== How-to overview

Available how-tos:

. xref:modular-monoliths/1-creating-a-module.adoc[Creating an application and modules]
. xref:modular-monoliths/2-module-dependencies.adoc[Defining module dependencies]
. xref:modular-monoliths/3-using-module-components.adoc[Using module components]
. xref:modular-monoliths/4-working-with-events.adoc[Working with events]
. xref:modular-monoliths/5-dynamic-application-module.adoc[The dynamic application module]

Future additions:

* name based resolving and transitive loading of modules
* working with conditionals for modules and components inside modules
* how modules can manage their own installation and run data or schema migrations
* embedding resources like message codes or templates
