docs/migration/modules/ROOT/pages/platform-2.1-to-5.0/standard-modules.adoc, before:


== Modules

In general most modules have breaking changes regarding Spring Data repositories, where single instance queries will now always return `Optional`.

=== AcrossHibernateModule

* some properties (`default-timeout`) have been changed of type, a duration is now sometimes required (eg. 5s instead of 5)

=== SpringSecurityModule

Most security configurations that used Spring Boot 1.5 defaults (for example for Actuator stuff) will need to be reviewed.

* Spring Boot no longer applies custom security to any endpoint, meaning that you will now have to manually apply the security you want by providing `WebSecurityConfigurerAdapter`
* if there is no `WebSecurityConfigurerAdapter` the default Spring security adapter will secure everything
** if you have SpringSecurityModule but do not want to have security applied, you should manually add a configuration that ignores everything
* Password encoding features have been modified, if you want to specify in memory users with a default password, you probably have to migrate your old code and prefix the password with `\{noop}` to avoid a no `PasswordEncoder` exception

See https://github.com/spring-projects/spring-boot/wiki/Spring-Boot-Security-2.0

=== EntityModule

Mostly Spring Data related changes.
In previous version a `Sort` could be `null` whereas now a `Sort.unsorted()` is used in Spring Data.
According changes in EntityModule have been done, passing `null` as a `Sort` should be avoided.

=== SpringMobileModule

Device specific Thymeleaf view resolving only works with the `.html` extension out of the box.
The previous `.thtml` extension is no longer supported.

WARNING: Spring Mobile is no longer part of Spring Platform Cairo, this indicates the project is probably not as much up-to-date as other Spring projects and its future might be uncertain.

Commit message:

mention of NotBlank, NotEmpty and Email validation annotations which have moved from their package

docs/migration/modules/ROOT/pages/platform-2.1-to-5.0/standard-modules.adoc, after:


== Modules

In general most modules have breaking changes regarding Spring Data repositories, where single instance queries will now always return `Optional`.

=== AcrossHibernateModule

* some properties (`default-timeout`) have been changed of type, a duration is now sometimes required (eg. 5s instead of 5)

=== SpringSecurityModule

Most security configurations that used Spring Boot 1.5 defaults (for example for Actuator stuff) will need to be reviewed.

* Spring Boot no longer applies custom security to any endpoint, meaning that you will now have to manually apply the security you want by providing `WebSecurityConfigurerAdapter`
* if there is no `WebSecurityConfigurerAdapter` the default Spring security adapter will secure everything
** if you have SpringSecurityModule but do not want to have security applied, you should manually add a configuration that ignores everything
* Password encoding features have been modified, if you want to specify in memory users with a default password, you probably have to migrate your old code and prefix the password with `\{noop}` to avoid a no `PasswordEncoder` exception

See https://github.com/spring-projects/spring-boot/wiki/Spring-Boot-Security-2.0

=== EntityModule

Mostly Spring Data related changes.
In previous version a `Sort` could be `null` whereas now a `Sort.unsorted()` is used in Spring Data.
According changes in EntityModule have been done, passing `null` as a `Sort` should be avoided.

`NotBlank`, `NotEmpty` and `Email` validation annotations have moved from the `org.hibernate.validator.constraints` package to `javax.validation.constraints` package.


=== SpringMobileModule

Device specific Thymeleaf view resolving only works with the `.html` extension out of the box.
The previous `.thtml` extension is no longer supported.

WARNING: Spring Mobile is no longer part of Spring Platform Cairo, this indicates the project is probably not as much up-to-date as other Spring projects and its future might be uncertain.
